---
layout: post
title: Weekly Report - 2018-07-23 to 2018-07-27
---

### Introduction: project summary

The current project was able to reach the following milestones
- Using original data (without vegetation) a replication study on the work of Phillips et al (2006) was performed. The lack of replicability points to various factors that include (a) the numerical representation of the software packages, (b) the form and quality of the original output to perform the comparison and (c) the unavailability of a modular software base to compare against within the Whole Tale.
- A series of methods to process presence-only data were developed and tested with real taxonomy data. In addition, plans are under way to include ASC file converters that facilitate ingestion as efficiently as possible through CSV files.

The final product can be downloaded [here](../maxent-notebook.ipynb).

These are the current open problems:

- The code for the solver needs to be re-implemented in order to avoid using a machine learning algorithm. This is the remaining challenge before obtaining a 1.0.0 version.
- A Docker instance with pre-installed software is required for mapping features and remove the need for users to install packages every time.

### Beyond this internship

I am deeply grateful to Prof. Ludäscher, Jessica Yi-Yun, Lan Li and the people at the WT for their support during this project. In addition, the School of Information Science (iSchool) provided an environment of friendship and intellectual stimulation.

Various future avenues for work in this area are as follows:
- Connecting to Jessica’s work in an integrated pipeline. Ideally, a user would select a fixed background dataset and two classifications. A taxonomy alignment would then be performed with visualization of the distributions and MaxEnt models would be computed for each species and, when they are comparable, perform a differential analysis.
- The answers provided by MaxEnt are too fixed and specific to be believable. The methods should move towards testing models against robustness against perturbations in terms of parameters and assumptions of the a priori guess for the probability density function.
- Connecting to DataONE pipelines. Ancillary functions have been setup in the code, and would decrease use of intermediate files.
- Connecting to GBIF pipelines. Many GBIF-enabled databases exist and consuming taxonomy data would remove the inefficiencies of additional storage. This is most important for the Whole Tale environment.
- Adding true provenance capabilities
- Refactoring the state machine for other applications. Our development suggests, in the context of other publications, that state machines can be used to generate a productive research workflow.
- Finally, there is a large research opportunity to delve into methodological research on effective/compelling Tale structures and how to measure their properties.
