---
layout: post
title: Weekly Report - 2018-07-09 to 2018-07-13
---

### Introduction: reproducing MaxEnt in The Whole Tale

This week we performed a first attempt at a unified Tale for Phillips 2006 paper with two simulation tools: **scikit-learn** vs **intros-MaxEnt**. The main standing blocker is  the need to install **mpl_toolkits.basemap** on top of **geos** in the Docker instance. While for the first reproducibility case there is a workaround, our library requires  requirement in the instance for both cases to be installed.

**GEOS** is provided as a package in most linux distributions through package manager, and there should be a staging procedure when the instance is called so that all relevant packages are installed. Also, the provisioning process should include it when WT instances are created.

Another task has been rounding details of the code and testing the correctness of the stochastic gradient descent. Several algorithms have proven to be tricky to parameterize for this problem in particular without resorting to machine learning. One of the goals across this internship remains that the software should be transparent, and most ML methods are black boxes. The example using a support vector machine in the tale should demonstrate the latter.

In addition, I have started investigating how to use GitHub’s facilities for release testing, management and delivery. The goal is that, after the end of this internship, a new unmanageable responsibility has not been created for WT or the iSchool. For the package itself, I have been adding more introspection to check input files and their correctness.

### The ASC file format for background data

Data ingestion in ecological niche modeling is often performed through the ESRI ASC (ASCII) file format. This file encodes the standard practice in geography in terms of required information to reproduce a map. There are several advantages for it:

- Produced from GIS layers
- Plain text format
- ‘Algorithmically’ georeferenced
- Missing data accounted for through extreme values as labels

Its main disadvantage is its verbosity and large storage size for sparse data. For that reason, future work will be performed to provide a translator from several ASC files to a single CSV file to be ingested by **intros-MaxEnt**. The tool should also indicate what is the most complete set of features and, if 5% of the data in one layer are missing with respect to the consensus, it should suggest reducing the area. If possible, the tool should also annotate correlations with presence-only data.

In terms of the Magnolias case, the process depends on biological knowledge of the species. Our present questions are (with Jessica):
- Finding datasets for Magnolias case:
- Which variables?
- Can we trace dataset for relevant characters?

The top level goal is the following: find variables that maximize the probability of mutually exclusive niches.

### Next steps

The most immediate steps are: (1) finalize the Tale with enough reproducibility details of the methods, in particular from the intuitions upwards.
