---
layout: post
title: Weekly Report - 2018-07-16 to 2018-07-20
---

### Introduction: the first Tale

Despite a small hiccups with the interactive **ipywidgets** package, the first tale was published. The focus of the tale has been the development of the
Focusing on the didactics that build intuitions for scholars, researchers and users of ecological niche modeling in general.

What are the biological assumptions?
What are the research questions?
What are the limits of applicability?

### A reflection on Deep Reproducibility

Reproducibility should also include the need for all aspects of a scientific program to be reconstructible from the ground up. Models are [causal scientific explanations](https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=2ug9DwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PR9&dq=wesley+salmon+scientific+explanation&ots=a4zVCJ7JxC&sig=03Kudlx7OlnpTtoasfc7memnnoU#v=onepage&q=wesley%20salmon%20scientific%20explanation&f=false). These explanations are compound and depend on prior data and auxiliary hypotheses. Even if conditions for independent parts hold, that does not guarantee that the composition will hold (for instance, assuming that certain value ranges never occur for a function but are actually visited in a real case thanks to the dynamics of a system). At the same time, we must not loose sight that the mathematics of the explanation refer to different levels of abstraction in the problems. In MaxEnt, for instance, we may perform the following associations:

- Entities -> locations
- Relations -> observations and probabilities
- Top-level observables -> species distribution

The mathematics of the abstraction assume pre-conditions of the phenomena being described. Again, using our favorite method, we can identify at least three levels of explanation that are not usually made explicit:

- Statements about evolution by natural selection: evolution is a theory of local adaptation, and we look at a stable state in a sequence of mixed gradual and punctuated events
- Statements about the state of an environmental niche: the climatic conditions, the geography and other elements are assumed fixed with respect to a certain time. However, even in such cases, variations occur at each reporting units. This implies that all conditions should be reported in detail.
- Statements about physiology: organisms are dependent on certain background conditions to thrive depending on the features that contributed to its evolution. The likelihood of survival for a member of a species can be associated with its isogenic phenotype, or the part of the phenotype most prevalent across all members disregarding particular variations.

In most papers, the latter is assumed to be known in the respective communities and seldom made explicit. Reproducibility should in addition imply *understanding of the minimal set of concepts needed to check the sanity of the assumptions at the deepest pragmatic level*.

### Next steps

At present, and given the time left for this internship, efforts will be placed in finalizing the Tale and creating the software context for **intros-MaxEnt** to grow. The stochastic gradient descent issues remain, and our own version is in the making. For the moment, we will not incorporate the **intros-MaxEnt** until infrastructure glitches are resolved.
