---
layout: post
title: Markdown Style Guide
---

## Weekly Report - 2018-05-21 to 2018-05-25

### Introduction: of reproducibility and biology

Starting at The Whole Tale this week has been exciting in various respects. Moreover, getting to know the technologies where the final product will be instantiated is motivating, since there is a need to provide reproducibility to cover issues of trust in scientific research and in research didactics: reproducibility, when referring to simulation, implies the need to allow newcomers and students to not only replicate results but understand why they are valid within the relevant context and particular chain of reasoning (Lateef, 2010).

First, attempting to uncover the meaning of reproducibility in biology research appears to be more complex in other areas due to three main factors:
1. The complexity of biological systems and their space-time dependencies increase the probability of having incomplete information about them.
2. Models capable of working with incomplete information are often constructed by aggregating sets of auxiliary principles and provisional hypotheses. It is hard for any of them to move to safer grounds considering the variety of entities and relations observed in nature.
3. Source data is often subject to random and epistemic uncertainty in biology. Data collection methods may be faulty and only partially informed about the relevant variables to be measured.

Second, the notion of reproducibility for ecological niche models may be conceptualized by the following decision tree:
Are the hypotheses adequately reflected on the choice of input data and parameters?
- No
	- Go to the model and gain understanding of the effects of each input and parameter.
	- Perform an empirical perturbation test on the parameters and choose exemplar inputs
	- Construct and study the statistical profile of a prototypical null set
	- Preprocess data in a reproducible way
- Yes (assuming a reproducible medium exists)
	- Present the context in a simple and concise manner
	- Describe the choice of model and potential alternatives
	- Describe the model and build tools for small sections critical to gaining intuition about their larger effect. Proceed upwards in a constructive fashion.
	- Write the procedural flow using a Preconditions - Transformations - Postconditions approach
	- Choose the most adequate visual representation that (a) does not get in the way of the modeling goal and (b) provides sufficient perspective.
	- Provide simple ways to perturbate the model in order to build scientific intuition and facilitate future learning.

Based on the latter, the immediate goals of this internship appear to converge to the following list:
1. Choose an ecological niche model that relates taxa to geographical variables based on presence observations.
2. Determine the conditions of critical elements within the model that lead to valid and reproducible research.
3. Replicate prior state of the art using test datasets within The Whole Tale environment.
4. Create de novo a research case using curated datasets within The Whole Tale environment.

### MaxEnt: theoretical aspects

MaxEnt is a model that attempts to reconstruct the probability density function for the presence of a species in a determinate geography based on presence-only data and geographical features of the landscape. The model is called unconstrained since it does not require absence data, and its mathematical structure (based on entropy maximization) ensures that a global maximum always exists. Entropy maximization was described in general by Jaynes (1957) as a way to approximate probability density functions when constrained with positive data.

Phillips, Anderson and Schapire (2006) developed MaxEnt as a methodology in ecological niche modeling and as a corresponding software package with all the necessary parameters. The input of the model consists of presence data (georeferenced) and environmental features data (georeferenced). Repeated use across literature has shown that most shortcomings (including those related to reproducibility) are due to inadequate assessment of biological hypotheses prior to setting up the computational experiment. Having such insight is critical to obtain scientifically meaningful results (Merow, Smith & Silander, 2013).

### MaxEnt: existing implementations

At present, I have tried the following packages and test code based on the recent references below. 

- The original MaxEnt software package in Java, not suitable for The Whole Tale
- Scikit-learn’s simplified version of the original MaxEnt paper inside The Whole Tale. Simplified to the extent that MaxEnt without features reduces to the gradients of a support vector machine.
- R’s implementation of MaxEnt, called maxnet. The documentation indicates that it replicates most options provided by MaxEnt, yet it lacks location awareness.
### Next steps
Run a version of the R code in The Whole Tale dev space.
- Find a dataset with location data for species presence.
- Write a Python-based version of MaxEnt with georeference awareness following Excel files in the Supplementary Materials of Merow et al. (2016).
- Replicate ab initio results by Phillips et al. (2006) using the Python version of MaxEnt.

### References

Jaynes, E. T. (1957). Information theory and statistical mechanics. Physical review, 106(4), 620.

Lateef, F. (2010). Simulation-based learning: Just like the real thing. Journal of Emergencies, Trauma and Shock, 3(4), 348.

Merow, C., Smith, M. J., & Silander, J. A. (2013). A practical guide to MaxEnt for modeling species’ distributions: what it does, and why inputs and settings matter. Ecography, 36(10), 1058-1069.

Phillips, S. J., Anderson, R. P., & Schapire, R. E. (2006). Maximum entropy modeling of species geographic distributions. Ecological modelling, 190(3-4), 231-259.

